IT HAS been stated before that the concepts of natural science
can sometimes be sharply defined with regard to their connec-
tions. This possibility was realized for the first time in Newton's
Principia and it is just for that reason that Newton's work has
exerted its enormous influence on the whole development of
natural science in the following centuries. Newton begins his
Principia with a group of definitions and axioms which are inter-
connected in such a way that they form what one may call a
*
'closed system." Each concept can be represented by a mathe-
matical symbol, and the connections between the different con-
cepts are then represented by mathematical equations expressed
by means of the symbols. The mathematical image of the system
ensures that contradictions cannot occur in the system. In this
way the possible motions of bodies under the influence of the
acting forces are represented by the possible solutions of the
equations. The system of definitions and axioms which can be
written in a set of mathematical equations is considered as de-
scribing an eternal structure of nature, depending neither on a
particular space nor on particular time. The connection between the different concepts in the system
is so close that one could generally not change any one of the
concepts without destroying the whole system.
For this reason Newton's system was for a long time con-
sidered as final and the task set before the scientists of the fol-
lowing period seemed simply to be an expansion of Newton's
mechanics into wider fields of experience. Actually physics did
develop along these lines for about two centuries.
From the theory of the motion of mass points one could go
over to the mechanics of solid bodies, to rotatory motions, and
one could treat the continuous motions of a fluid or the vibrating
motions of an elastic body. All these parts of mechanics or
dynamics were gradually developed in close connection with the
evolution of mathematics, especially of the differential calculus,
and the results were checked by experiments. Acoustics and
hydrodynamics became a part of mechanics. Another science, in
which the application of Newton's mechanics was obvious, was
astronomy. The improvements of the mathematical methods
gradually led to more and more accurate determinations of the
motions of the planets and of their mutual interactions. When
the phenomena of electricity and magnetism were discovered,
the electric or magnetic forces were compared to the gravita-
tional forces and their actions upon the motion of the bodies
could again be studied along the lines of Newtonian mechanics.
Finally, in the nineteenth century, even the theory of heat could
be reduced to mechanics by the assumption that heat really con-
sists of a complicated statistical motion of the smallest parts of
matter. By combining the concepts of the mathematical theory
of probability with the concepts of Newtonian mechanics
Clausius, Gibbs and Boltzmann were able to show that the
fundamental laws in the theory of heat could be interpreted as statistical laws following from Newton's mechanics when applied
to very complicated mechanical systems.
Up to this point the program set up by Newtonian mechanics
had been carried out quite consistently and had led to the under-
standing of a wide field of experience. The first difficulty arose
in the discussions on the electromagnetic field in the work of
Faraday and Maxwell. In Newtonian mechanics the gravita-
tional force had been considered as given, not as an object for
further theoretical studies. In the work of Faraday and Max-
well, however, the field of force itself became the object of the
investigation; the physicists wanted to know how this field of
force varied as function of space and time. Therefore, they tried
to set up equations of motion for the fields, not primarily for the
bodies upon which the fields act. This change led back to a
point of view which had been held by many scientists before
Newton. An action could, so it seemed, be transferred from one
body to another only when the two bodies touched each other;
for instance, in a collision or through friction. Newton had intro-
duced a very new and strange hypothesis by assuming a force
that acted over a long distance. Now in the theory of the fields
of force one could come back to the older idea, that action is
transferred from one point to a neighboring point, only by de-
scribing the behavior of the fields in terms of differential equa-
tions. This proved actually to be possible, and therefore the
description of the electromagnetic fields as given by Maxwell's
equations seemed a satisfactory solution of the problem of force.
Here one had really changed the program given by Newtonian
mechanics. The axioms and definitions of Newton had referred
to bodies and their motion; but with Maxwell the fields of force
seemed to have acquired the same degree of reality as the bodies
in Newton's theory. This view of course was not easily ac-cepted; and to avoid such a change in the concept of reality it
seemed plausible to compare the electromagnetic fields with the
fields of elastic deformation or stress, the light waves of Max-
well's theory with the sound waves in elastic bodies. Therefore,
many physicists believed that Maxwell's equations actually re-
ferred to the deformations of an elastic medium, which they
called the ether; and this name was given merely to explain that
the medium was so light and thin that it could penetrate into
other matter and could not be seen or felt. This explanation was
not too satisfactory, however, since it could not explain the
complete absence of any longitudinal light waves.
Finally the theory of relativity, which will be discussed in the
next chapter, showed in a conclusive way that the concept of the
ether as a substance, to which Maxwell's equations refer, had to
be abandoned. The arguments cannot be discussed at this point;
but the result was that the fields had to be considered as an inde-
pendent reality.
A further and still more startling result of the theory of
special relativity was the discovery of new properties of space
and time, actually of a relation between space and time that had
not been known before and did not exist in Newtonian me-
chanics.
Under the impression of this completely new situation many
physicists came to the following somewhat rash conclusion:
Newtonian mechanics had finally been disproved. The primary
reality is the field and not the body, and the structure of space
and time is correctly described by the formulas of Lorentz and
Einstein, and not by the axioms of Newton. The mechanics of
Newton was a good approximation in many cases, but now it
must be improved to give a more rigorous description of nature.
From the point of view which we have finally reached in quantum theory such a statement would appear as a very poor
description of the actual situation. First, it ignores the fact that
most experiments by which fields are measured are based upon
Newtonian mechanics and, second, that Newtonian mechanics
cannot be improved; it can only be replaced by something essen-
tially different!
The development of quantum theory has taught us that one
should rather describe the situation in the following terms:
Wherever the concepts of Newtonian mechanics can be used to
describe events in nature, the laws formulated by Newton are
strictly correct and cannot be improved. But the electromagnetic
phenomena cannot adequately be described by the concepts of
Newtonian mechanics. Therefore, the experiments on the
electromagnetic fields and on light waves, together with their
theoretical analysis by Maxwell, Lorentz and Einstein, have led
to a new closed system of definitions and axioms and of con-
cepts that can be represented by mathematical symbols, which
is coherent in the same sense as the system of Newton's me-
chanics, but is essentially different from it.
Therefore, even the hopes which had accompanied the work
of the scientists since Newton had to be changed. Apparently
progress in science could not always be achieved by using the
known laws of nature for explaining new phenomena. In some
cases new phenomena that had been observed could only be
understood by new concepts which were adapted to the new
phenomena in the same way as Newton's concepts were to the
mechanical events. These new concepts again could be con-
nected in a closed system and represented by mathematical
symbols. But if physics or, more generally, natural science pro-
ceeded in this way, the question arose: What is the relation be-
tween the different sets of concepts? If, for instance, the same concepts or words occur in two different sets and are defined
differently with regard to their connection and mathematical
representation, in what sense do the concepts represent reality?
This problem arose at once when the theory of special rela-
tivity had been discovered. The concepts of space and time be-
longed both to Newtonian mechanics and to the theory of rela-
tivity. But space and time in Newtonian mechanics were inde-
pendent; in the theory of relativity they were connected by the
Lorentz transformation. In this special case one could show that
the statements of the theory of relativity approached those of
Newtonian mechanics within the limit in which all velocities in
the system are very small as compared with the velocity of light.
From this one could conclude that the concepts of Newtonian
mechanics could not be applied to events in which there oc-
curred velocities comparable to the velocity of light. Thereby one
had finally found an essential limitation of Newtonian me-
chanics which could not be seen from the coherent set of con-
cepts nor from simple observations on mechanical systems.
Therefore, the relation between two different coherent sets of
concepts always requires very careful investigation. Before we
enter into a general discussion about the structure of any such
closed and coherent set of concepts and about their possible rela-
tions we will give a brief description of those sets of concepts that
have so far been defined in physics. One can distinguish four
systems that have already attained their final form.
The first set, Newtonian mechanics, has already been dis-
cussed. It is suited for the description of all mechanical systems,
of the motion of fluids and the elastic vibration of bodies; it
comprises acoustics, statics, aerodynamics.
The second closed system of concepts was formed in the
course of the nineteenth century in connection with the theory of heat. Though the theory of heat could finally be connected
with mechanics through the development of statistical me-
chanics, it would not be realistic to consider it as a part of
mechanics. Actually the phenomenological theory of heat uses
a number of concepts that have no counterpart in other
branches of physics, like: heat, specific heat, entropy, free
energy, etc. If from this phenomenological description one goes
over to a statistical interpretation, by considering heat as energy,
distributed statistically among the very many degrees of freedom
due to the atomic structure of matter, then heat is no more con-
nected with mechanics than with electrodynamics or other parts
of physics. The central concept of this interpretation is the
concept of probability, closely connected with the concept of
entropy in the phenomenological theory. Besides this concept the
statistical theory of heat requires the concept of energy. But any
coherent set of axioms and concepts in physics will necessarily
contain the concepts of energy, momentum and angular mo-
mentum and the law that these quantities must under certain
conditions be conserved. This follows if the coherent set is in-
tended to describe certain features of nature that are correct at
all times and everywhere; in other words, features that do not
depend on space and time or, as the mathematicians put it, that
are invariant under arbitrary translations in space and time,
rotations in space and the Galileo or Lorentz transformation.
Therefore, the theory of heat can be combined with any of the
other closed systems of concepts.
The third dosed system of concepts and axioms has its origin
in the phenomena of electricity and magnetism and has reached
its final form in the first decade of the twentieth century through
the work of Lorentz, Einstein and MinkowskL It comprises
electrodynamics, special relativity, optics, magnetism, and one may include the de Broglie theory of matter waves of all dif-
ferent sorts of elementary particles, but not the wave theory of
Schrodinger.
Finally, the fourth coherent system is essentially the quantum
theory as it has been described in the first two chapters. Its
central concept is the probability function, or the "statistical
matrix," as the mathematicians call it. It comprises quantum
and wave mechanics, the theory of atomic spectra, chemistry,
and the theory of other properties of matter like electric con-
ductivity, ferromagnetism, etc.
The relations between these four sets of concepts can be indi-
cated in the following way: The first set is contained in the third
as the limiting case where the velocity of light can be considered
as infinitely big, and is contained in the fourth as the limiting
case where Planck's constant of action can be considered as
infinitely small. The first and partly the third set belong to the
fourth as a priori for the description of the experiments. The
second set can be connected with any of the other three sets
without difficulty and is especially important in its connection
with the fourth. The independent existence of the third and
fourth sets suggests the existence of a fifth set, of which one,
three, and four are limiting cases. This fifth set will probably be
found someday in connection with the theory of the elementary
particles.
We have omitted from this enumeration the set of concepts
connected with the theory of general relativity, since this set
has perhaps not yet reached its final form. But it should be
emphasized that it is distinctly different from the other four sets.
After this short survey we may come back to the more general
question, what one should consider as the characteristic features
Q such a closed system of axioms and definitions. Perhaps the most important feature is the possibility of finding a consistent
mathematical representation for it. This representation must
guarantee that the system does not contain contradictions. Then
the system must be suited to describe a wide field of experience.
The great variety of phenomena in the field should correspond
to the great number of solutions of the equations in the mathe-
matical representation. The limitations of the field can generally
not be derived from the concepts. The concepts are not sharply
defined in their relation to nature, in spite of the sharp definition
of their possible connections. The limitations will therefore be
found from experience, from the fact that the concepts do not
allow a complete description of the observed phenomena.
After this brief analysis of the structure of present-day physics
the relation between physics and other branches of natural
science may be discussed. The nearest neighbor to physics is
chemistry. Actually through quantum theory these two sciences
have come to a complete union. But a hundred years ago they
were widely separated, their methods of research were quite
different, and the concepts of chemistry had at that time no
counterpart in physics. Concepts like valency, activity, solubility
and volatility had a more qualitative character, and chemistry
scarcely belonged to the exact sciences. When the theory of heat
had been developed by the middle of the last century scientists
started to apply it to the chemical processes, and ever since then
the scientific work in this field has been determined by the hope
of reducing the laws of chemistry to the mechanics of the atoms.
It should be emphasized, however, that this was not possible
within the framework of Newtonian mechanics. In order to give
a quantitative description of the laws of chemistry one had to
formulate a much wider system of concepts for atomic physics.
This was finally done in quantum theory, which has its roots just as much in chemistry as in atomic physics. Then it was easy
to see that the laws of chemistry could not be reduced to New-
tonian mechanics of atomic particles, since the chemical elements
displayed in their behavior a degree of stability completely lack-
ing in mechanical systems. But it was not until Bohr's theory of
the atom in 1913 that this point had been clearly understood. In
the final result, one may say, the concepts of chemistry are hi
part complementary to the mechanical concepts. If we know
that an atom is in its lowest stationary state that determines its
chemical properties we cannot at the same time speak about the
motion of the electrons in the atom.
The present relation between biology, on the one side, and
physics and chemistry, on the other, may be very similar to that
between chemistry and physics a hundred years ago. The
methods of biology are different from those of physics and
chemistry, and the typical biological concepts are of a more
qualitative character than those of the exact sciences. Concepts
like life, organ, cell, function of an organ, perception have no
counterpart in physics or chemistry. On the other hand, most of
the progress made in biology during the past hundred years has
been achieved through the application of chemistry and physics
to the living organism, and the whole tendency of biology in our
time is to explain biological phenomena on the basis of the
known physical and chemical laws. Again the question arises,
whether this hope is justified or not.
Just as in the case of chemistry, one learns from simple bio-
logical experience that the living organisms display a degree of
stability which general complicated structures consisting of many
different types of molecules could certainly not have on the basis
of the physical and chemical laws alone. Therefore, something has to be added to the laws of physics and chemistry before the
biological phenomena can be completely understood.
With regard to this question two distinctly different views
have frequently been discussed in the biological literature. The
one view refers to Darwin's theory of evolution in its connection
with modern genetics. According to this theory, the only concept
which has to be added to those of physics and chemistry in order
to understand life is the concept of history. The enormous time
interval of roughly four thousand million years that has elapsed
since the formation of the earth has given nature the possibility
of trying an almost unlimited variety of structures of groups of
molecules. Among these structures there have finally been some
that could reduplicate themselves by using smaller groups from
the surrounding matter, and such structures therefore could be
created in great numbers. Accidental changes in the structures
provided a still larger variety of the existing structures. Different
structures had to compete for the material drawn from the sur-
rounding matter and in this way, through the "survival of the
fittest/' the evolution of living organisms finally took place.
There can be no doubt that this theory contains a very large
amount of truth, and many biologists claim that the addition of
the concepts of history and evolution to the coherent set of con-
cepts of physics and chemistry will be amply sufficient to account
for all biological phenomena. One of the arguments frequently
used in favor of this theory emphasizes that wherever the laws of
physics and chemistry have been checked in living organisms
they have always been found to be correct; there seems definitely
to be no place at which some "vital force" different from the
forces in physics could enter.
On the other hand, it is just this argument that has lost much
of its weight through quantum theory. Since the concepts of physics and chemistry form a closed and coherent set, namely,
that of quantum theory, it is necessary that wherever these con-
cepts can be used to describe phenomena the laws connected
with the concepts must be valid too. Therefore, wherever one
treats living organisms as physicochemical systems, they must
necessarily act as such. The only question from which we can
learn something about the adequacy of this first view is whether
the physicochemical concepts allow a complete description of the
organisms. Biologists, who answer this question in the negative,
generally hold the second view, that has now to be explained.
This second view can perhaps be stated in the following
terms: It is very difficult to see how concepts like perception,
function of an organ, affection could be a part of the coherent
set of the concepts of quantum theory combined with the con-
cept of history. On the other hand, these concepts are necessary
for a complete description of life, even if for the moment we
exclude mankind as presenting new problems beyond biology.
Therefore, it will probably be necessary for an understanding of
life to go beyond quantum theory and to construct a new co-
herent set of concepts, to which physics and chemistry may be-
long as "limiting cases ;" History may be an essential part of it,
and concepts like perception, adaptation, affection also will be-
long to it. If this view is correct, the combination of Darwin's
theory with physics and chemistry would not be sufficient to
explain organic life; but still it would be true that living organ-
isms can to a large extent be considered as physicochemical sys-
tems as machines, as Descartes and Laplace have put it and
would, if treated as such, also react as such. One could at the
same time assume, as Bohr has suggested, that our knowledge of
a cell being alive may be complementary to the complete knowl-
edge of its molecular structure. Since a complete knowledge of tliis structure could possibly be achieved only by operations that
destroy the life of the cell, it is logically possible that life pre-
cludes the complete determination of its underlying physico-
chemical structure. Even if one holds this second view one would
probably recommend for biological research no other method
than has been pursued in the past decades: attempting to ex-
plain as much as possible on the basis of the known physico-
chemical laws, and describing the behavior of organisms
carefully and without theoretical prejudices.
The first of these two views is more common among modern
biologists than the second; but the experience available at pres-
ent is certainly not sufficient to decide between the two views.
The preference that is given by many biologists to the first view
may be due again to the Cartesian partition, which has pene-
trated so deeply into the human mind during the past centuries.
Since the "res cogitans" was confined to men, to the "I," the
animals could have no soul, they belonged exclusively to the "res
extensa/5
Therefore, the animals can be understood, so it is
argued, on the same terms as matter in general, and the laws of
physics and chemistry together with the concept of history must
be sufficient to explain their behavior. It is only when the "res
cogitans" is brought in that a new situation arises which will re-
quire entirely new concepts. But the Cartesian partition is a
dangerous oversimplification and it is therefore quite possible
that the second view is the correct one.
Quite apart from this question, which cannot be settled yet,
we are obviously still very far from such a coherent and closed
set of concepts for the description of biological phenomena. The
degree of complication in biology is so discouraging that one
can at present not imagine any set of concepts in which the con-nections could be so sharply defined that a mathematical repre-
sentation could become possible.
If we go beyond biology and include psychology in the discus-
sion, then there can scarcely be any doubt but that the concepts
of physics, chemistry, and evolution together will not be suffi-
cient to describe the facts. On this point the existence of quan-
tum theory has changed our attitude from what was believed in
the nineteenth century. During that period some scientists were
inclined to think that the psychological phenomena could ulti-
mately be explained on the basis of physics and chemistry of the
brain. From the quantum-theoretical point of view there is no
reason for such an assumption. We would, in spite of the fact
that the physical events in the brain belong to the psychic
phenomena, not expect that these could be sufficient to explain
them. We would never doubt that the brain acts as a physico-
chemical mechanism if treated as such; but for an understanding
of psychic phenomena we would start from the fact that the
human mind enters as object and subject into the scientific
process of psychology.
Looking back to the different sets of concepts that have been
formed in the past or may possibly be formed in the future in the
attempt to find our way through the world by means of science,
we see that they appear to be ordered by the increasing part
played by the subjective element in the set. Classical physics can
be considered as that idealization in which we speak about the
world as entirely separated from ourselves. The first three sets
correspond to this idealization. Only the first set complies en-
tirely with the "a priori" in the philosophy of Kant. In the
fourth set, that of quantum theory, man as the subject of science
is brought in through the questions which are put to nature in
the a priori terms of human science. Quantum theory does not allow a completely objective description of nature. In biology It
may be important for a complete understanding that the ques-
tions are asked by the species man which itself belongs to the
genus of living organisms, in other words, that we already know
what life Is even before we have defined it scientifically. But one
should perhaps not enter into speculations about the possible
structure of sets of concepts that have not yet been formed.
When one compares this order with older classifications that
belong to earlier stages of natural science one sees that one has
now divided the world not into different groups of objects but
Into different groups of connections. In an earlier period of
science one distinquished, for instance, as different groups
minerals, plants, animals, men. These objects were taken accord-
ing to their group as of different natures, made of different ma-
terials, and determined in their behavior by different forces.
Now we know that it is always the same matter, the same various
chemical compounds that may belong to any object, to minerals
as well as animals or plants; also the forces that act between the
different parts of matter are ultimately the same in every kind of
object. What can be distinguished is the kind of connection
which is primarily important in a certain phenomenon. For
instance, when we speak about the action of chemical forces we
mean a kind of connection which Is more complicated or in any
case different from that expressed In Newtonian mechanics. The
world thus appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which
connections of different kinds alternate or overlap or combine
and thereby determine the texture of the whole.
When we represent a group of connections by a closed and
coherent set of concepts, axioms, definitions and laws which in
turn is represented by a mathematical scheme we have in fact
isolated and idealized this group of connections with the purpose of clarification. But even if complete clarity has been achieved in
this way, it is not known how accurately the set of concepts
describes reality.
These idealizations may be called a part of the human lan-
guage that has been formed from the interplay between the
world and ourselves, a human response to the challenge of
nature. In this respect they may be compared to the different
styles of art, say of architecture or music. A style of art can also
be defined by a set of formal rules which are applied to the
material of this special art. These rules can perhaps not be repre-
sented in a strict sense by a set of mathematical concepts and
equations, but their fundamental elements are very closely re-
lated to the essential elements of mathematics. Equality and in-
equality, repetition and symmetry, certain group structures play
the fundamental role both in art and in mathematics. Usually
the work of several generations is needed to develop that formal
system which later is called the style of the art, from its simple
beginning to the wealth of elaborate forms which characterize its
completion. The interest of the artist is concentrated on this
process of crystallization, where the material of the art takes,
through his action, the various forms that are initiated by the
first formal concepts of this style. After the completion the
interest must fade again, because the word "interest" means: to
be with something, to take part in a process of life, but this
process has then come to an end. Here again the question of how
far the formal rules of the style represent that reality of life
which is meant by the art cannot be decided from the formal
rules. Art is always an idealization; the ideal is different from
reality at least from the reality of the shadows, as Plato would
have put it but idealization is necessary for understanding.
This comparison between the different sets of concepts in natural science with different styles of art may seem very far
from the truth to those who consider the different styles of art
as rather arbitrary products of the human mind. They would
argue that in natural science these different sets of concepts
represent objective reality,, have been taught to us by nature, are
therefore by no means arbitrary, and are a necessary conse-
quence of our gradually increasing experimental knowledge of
nature. About these points most scientists would agree; but are
the different styles of art an arbitrary product of the human
mind? Here again we must not be misled by the Cartesian
partition. The style arises out of the inteiplay between the world
and ourselves, or more specifically between the spirit of the time
and the artist. The spirit of a time is probably a fact as objective
as any fact in natural science, and this spirit brings out certain
features of the world which are even Independent of time, are
in this sense eternal. The artist tries by his work to make these
features understandable, and in this attempt he is led to the
forms of the style In which he works.
Therefore, the two processes, that of science and that of art,
are not very different. Both science and art form in the course of
the centuries a human language by which we can speak about
the more remote parts of reality, and the coherent sets of con-
cepts as well as the different styles of art are different words or
groups of words in this language.