It is the thesis of World Perspectives that man is in the
process of developing a new consciousness which, in spite of his
apparent spiritual and moral captivity,, can eventually lift the
human race above and beyond the fear, ignorance, and isolation
which beset it today. It is to this nascent consciousness, to this
concept of man born out of a universe perceived through a fresh
vision of reality, that World Perspectives is dedicated.
Only those spiritual and intellectual leaders of our epoch who
have a paternity in this extension of man's horizons are invited
to participate in this Series: those who are aware of the truth
that beyond the divisiveness among men there exists a primor-
dial unitive power since we are all bound together by a common
humanity more fundamental than any unity of dogma; those
who recognize that the centrifugal force which has scattered and
atomized mankind must be replaced by an integrating structure
and process capable of bestowing meaning and purpose on exist-
ence; those who realize that science itself, when not inhibited by
the limitations of its own methodology, when chastened and
humbled, commits man to an indeterminate range of yet un-
dreamed consequences that may flow from it.
This Series endeavors to point to a reality of which scientific
theory has revealed only one aspect. It is the commitment to this
reality that lends universal intent to a scientist's most original
and solitary thought. By acknowledging this frankly we shall restore science to the great family of human aspirations by which
men hope to fulfill themselves in the world community as think-
ing and sentient beings. For our problem is to discover a prin-
ciple of differentiation and yet relationship lucid enough to
justify and to purify scientific, philosophic and all other knowl-
edge, both discursive and intuitive, by accepting their inter-
dependence. This is the crisis in consciousness made articulate
through the crisis in science. This is the new awakening.
Each volume presents the thought and belief of its author
and points to the way in which religion, philosophy, art, science,
economics, politics and history may constitute that form of
human activity which takes the fullest and most precise account
of variousness, possibility, complexity and difficulty. Thus World
Perspectives endeavors to define that ecumenical power of the
mind and heart which enables man through his mysterious great-
ness to re-create his life.
This Series is committed to a re-examination of all those sides
of human endeavor which the specialist was taught to believe
he could safely leave aside. It interprets present and past events
impinging on human life in our growing World Age and en-
visages what man may yet attain when summoned by an un-
bending inner necessity to the quest of what is most exalted in
him. Its purpose is to offer new vistas in terms of world and
human development while refusing to betray the intimate cor-
relation between universality and individuality, dynamics and
form, freedom and destiny. Each author deals with the increas-
ing realization that spirit and nature are not separate and apart;
that intuition and reason must regain their importance as the
means of perceiving and fusing inner being with outer reality.
World Perspectives endeavors to show that the conception of
wholeness, unity, organism is a higher and more concrete conception than that of matter and energy. Thus an enlarged mean-
ing of life, of biology, not as it is revealed in the test tube of the
laboratory but as it is experienced within the organism of life
itself3 is attempted in this Series. For the principle of life consists
in the tension which connects spirit with the realm of matter.
The element of life is dominant in the very texture of nature,
thus rendering life, biology, a trans-empirical science. The laws
of life have their origin beyond their mere physical manifesta-
tions and compel us to consider their spiritual source. In fact,
the widening of the conceptual framework has not only served to
restore order within the respective branches of knowledge, but
has also disclosed analogies in man's position regarding the
analysis and synthesis of experience in apparently separated do-
mains of knowledge suggesting the possibility of an ever more
embracing objective description of the meaning of life.
Knowledge, it is shown in these books, no longer consists in a
manipulation of man and nature as opposite forces, nor in the
reduction of data to mere statistical order, but is a means of
liberating mankind from the destructive power of fear, pointing
the way toward the goal of the rehabilitation of the human will
and the rebirth of faith and confidence in the human person.
The works published also endeavor to reveal that the cry for
patterns, systems and authorities is growing less insistent as the
desire grows stronger in both East and West for the recovery of
a dignity, integrity and self-realization which are the inalienable
rights of man who may now guide change by means of conscious
purpose in the light of rational experience.
Other vital questions explored relate to problems of inter-
national understanding as well as to problems dealing with
prejudice and the resultant tensions and antagonisms. The grow-
ing perception and responsibility of our World Age point to the new reality that the individual person and the collective person
supplement and integrate each other; that the thrall of totali-
tarianism of both left and right has been shaken in the universal
desire to recapture the authority of truth and human totality.
Mankind can finally place its trust not in a proletarian authori-
tarianism, not in a secularized humanism, both of which have
betrayed the spiritual property right of history, but in a sacra-
mental brotherhood and in the unity of knowledge. This new
consciousness has created a widening of human horizons be-
yond every parochialism, and a revolution in human thought
comparable to the basic assumption, among the ancient Greeks,
of the sovereignty of reason; corresponding to the great efful-
geuoe^of the moral conscience articulated by the Hebrew proph-
ets; analogous to the fundamental assertions of Christianity; or
to the beginning of a new scientific era, the era of the science of
dynamics, the experimental foundations of which were laid by
Galileo in the Renaissance.
An important effort of this Series is to re-examine the contra-
dictory meanings and applications which are given today to such
terms as democracy, freedom, justice, love, peace, brotherhood
and God. The purpose of such inquiries is to clear the way for
the foundation of a genuine world history not in terms of nation
or race or culture but in terms of man in relation to God, to
himself, his fellow man and the universe, that reach beyond im-
mediate self-interest. For the meaning of the World Age consists
in respecting man's hopes and dreams which lead to a deeper
understanding of the basic values of all peoples.
World Perspectives is planned to gain insight into the mean-
ing of man, who not only is determined by history but who also
determines history. History is to be understood as concerned not
only with the Ufe of man on this planet but as including also such cosmic influences as interpenetrate our human world. This
generation is discovering that history does not conform to the
social optimism of modern civilization and that the organization
of human communities and the establishment of freedom and
peace are not only intellectual achievements but spiritual and
moral achievements as well, demanding a cherishing of the
wholeness of human personality, the "unmediated wholeness of
feeling and thought," and constituting a never-ending challenge
to man, emerging from the abyss of meaninglessness and suffer-
ing, to be renewed and replenished in the totality of his life.
Justice itself, which has beenecin a state of pilgrimage and
crucifixion" and now is being slowly liberated from the grip of
social and political demonologies in the East as well as in the
West, begins to question its own premises. The modern revolu-
tionary movements which have challenged the sacred institutions
of society by protecting social injustice in the name of social
justice are examined and re-evaluated.
In the light of this, we have no choice but to admit that the
unireedom against which freedom is measured must be retained
with it, namely, that the aspect of truth out of which the night
view appears to emerge, the darkness of our time, is as little
abandonable as is man's subjective advance. Thus the two
sources of man's consciousness are inseparable, not as dead but
as living and complementary, an aspect of that "principle of
complementarity" through which Niels Bohr has sought to unite
the quantum and the wave, both of which constitute the very
fabric of life's radiant energy.
There is in mankind today a counterforce to the sterility and
danger of a quantitative, anonymous mass culture, a new, if
sometimes imperceptible, spiritual sense of convergence toward
world unity on the basis of the sacredness of each human person and respect for the plurality of cultures. There is a growing
awareness that equality may not be evaluated in mere numerical
terms but is proportionate and analogical in its reality. For when
equality is equated with interchangeability, individuality is
negated and the human person extinguished.
We stand at the brink of an age of a world in which human
life presses forward to actualize new forms. The false separation
of man and nature, of time and space, of freedom and security,
is acknowledged and we are faced with a new vision of man in
his organic unity and of history offering a richness and diversity
of quality and majesty of scope hitherto unprecedented. In re-
lating the accumulated wisdom of man's spirit to the new reality
of the World Age, in articulating its thought and belief, World
Perspectives seeks to encourage a renaissance of hope in society
and of pride in man's decision as to what his destiny will be.
World Perspectives is committed to the recognition that all
great changes are preceded by a vigorous intellectual reevalua-
tion and reorganization. Our authors are aware that the sin of
hybris may be avoided by showing that the creative process itself
is not a free activity if by free we mean arbitrary, or unrelated
to cosmic law. For the creative process in the human mind, the
developmental process in organic nature and the basic laws of
the inorganic realm may be but varied expressions of a universal
formative process. Thus World Perspectives hopes to show that
although the present apocalyptic period is one of exceptional
tensions, there is also at' work' an exceptional movement toward
a compensating unity which refuses to violate the ultimate moral
power at work in the universe, that very power upon which all
human effort must at last depend. In this way we may come to
understand that there exists an inherent independence of
spiritual and mental growth which though conditioned by circumstances is never determined by circumstances. In this way
the great plethora of human knowledge may be correlated with
an insight into the nature of human nature by being attuned to
the wide and deep range of human thought and human ex-
perience.
In spite of the infinite obligation of men and in spite of their
finite power, in spite of the intransigence of nationalisms, and in
spite of the homelessness of moral passions rendered ineffectual
by the scientific outlook, beneath the apparent turmoil and up-
heaval of the present, and out of the transformations of this
dynamic period with the unfolding of a world consciousness, the
purpose of World Perspectives is to help quicken the "unshaken
heart of well-rounded truth' 3 and interpret the significant ele-
ments of the World Age now taking shape out of the core of that
undimmed continuity of the creative process which restores man
to mankind while deepening and enhancing his communion
with the universe.