There is a general awareness that contemporary physics has
brought about an important revision in man's conception of the
universe and his relation to it. The suggestion has been made
that this revision pierces to the basis of man's fate and freedom,
affecting even his conception of his capacity to control his own
destiny. In no portion of physics does this suggestion show itself
more pointedly than in the principle of indeterminacy of quan-
tum mechanics. The author of this book is the discoverer of this
principle. In fact, it usually bears his name. Hence, no one is
more competent to pass judgment on what it means than he.
In his previous book, The Physical Principles of the Quantum
Theory* Heisenberg gave an exposition of the theoretical
interpretation, experimental meaning and mathematical appa-
ratus of quantum mechanics for professional physicists. Here
he pursues this and other physical theories with respect to their
philosophical implications and some of their likely social conse-
quences for the layman. More specifically, he attempts here
to raise and suggest answers to three questions: (1) What do
the experimentally verified theories of contemporary physics
affirm? (2) How do they permit or require man to think of
himself in relation to his universe? (3) How is this new way of thinking, which is the creation of the modern West, going to
affect other parts of the world?
The third of these questions is dealt with briefly by Heisen-
berg at the beginning and end of this inquiry. The brevity
of his remarks should not lead the reader to pass lightly over
their import. As he notes, whether we like it or not, modern
ways are going to alter and in part destroy traditional customs
and values. It is frequently assumed by native leaders of non-
Western societies, and also often by their Western advisers, that
the problem of introducing modern scientific instruments and
ways into Asia, the Middle East and Africa is merely that of
giving the native people their political independence and then
providing them with the funds and the practical instruments.
This facile assumption overlooks several things. First, the instru-
ments of modern science derive from its theory and require a
comprehension of that theory for their correct manufacture or
effective use. Second, this theory in turn rests on philosophical,
as well as physical, assumptions. When comprehended, these
philosophical assumptions generate a personal and social men-
tality and behavior quite different from, and at points
incompatible with, the family, caste and tribally centered men-
tality and values of the native Asian, Middle Eastern or African
people. In short, one cannot bring in the instruments of modern
physics without sooner or later introducing its philosophical
mentality, and this mentality, as it captures the scientifically
trained youth, upsets the old familial and tribal moral loyalties.
If unnecessary emotional conflict and social demoralization are
not to result, it is important that the youth understand what is
happening to them. This means that they must see their ex-
perience as the coming together of two different philosophical
mentalities, that of their traditional culture and that of the new physics. Hence, the importance for everyone of understanding
the philosophy of the new physics.
But it may be asked, Isn't physics quite independent of
philosophy? Hasn't modern physics become effective only by
dropping philosophy? Clearly, Heisenberg answers both of these
questions in the negative. Why is this the case?
Newton left the impression that there were no assumptions in
his physics which were not necessitated by the experimental
data. This occurred when he suggested that he made no hypoth-
eses and that he had deduced his basic concepts and laws from
the experimental findings. Were this conception of the relation
between the physicist's experimental observations and his theory
correct, Newton's theory would never have required modifica-
tion, nor could it ever have implied consequences which experi-
ment does not confirm. Being implied by the facts, it would be
as indubitable and final as they are.
In 1885, however, an experiment performed by Michelson
and Morley revealed a fact which should not exist were the
theoretical assumptions of Newton the whole truth. This made
it evident that the relation between the physicist's experimental
facts and his theoretical assumptions is quite other than what
Newton had led many modern physicists to suppose. When,
some ten years later, experiments on radiation from black bodies
enforced an additional reconstruction in Newton's way of think-
ing about his subject matter, this conclusion became inescapable.
Expressed positively, this means that the theory of physics is
neither a mere description of experimental facts nor something
deducible from such a description; instead, as Einstein has
emphasized, the physical scientist only arrives at his theory by
speculative means. The deduction in his method runs not from
facts to the assumptions of the theory but from the assumed theory to the facts and the experimental data. Consequently,
theories have to be proposed speculatively and pursued de-
ductively with respect to their many consequences so that they
can be put to indirect experimental tests. In short, any theory of
physics makes more physical and philosophical assumptions than
the facts alone give or imply. For this reason, any theory is sub-
ject to further modification and reconstruction with the advent
of new evidence that is incompatible, after the manner of the
results of the Michelson-Morley experiment, with its basic as-
sumptions.
These assumptions, moreover, are philosophical in character.
They may be ontological, i.e., referring to the subject matter of
scientific knowledge which is independent of its relation to the
perceiver; or they may be epistemological, i.e., referring to the
relation of the scientist as experimenter and knower to the
subject matter which he knows. Einstein's special and general
theories of relativity modify the philosophy of modern physics
in the first of these two respects by radically altering the philo-
sophical theory of space and time and their relation to matter.
Quantum mechanics, especially its Heisenberg principle of
indeterminacy, has been notable for the change it has brought
in the physicist's epistemological theory of the relation of the
experimenter to the object of his scientific knowledge. Perhaps
the most novel and important thesis of this book is its author's
contention that quantum mechanics has brought the concept of
potentiality back into physical science. This makes quantum
theory as important for ontology as for epistemology. At this
point, Heisenberg's philosophy of physics has an element in
common with that of Whitehead.
It is because of this introduction of potentiality into the
subject matter of physics, as distinct from the epistemological predicament of physicists, that Einstein objected to quantum
mechanics. He expressed this objection by saying: "God does
not play dice." The point of this statement is that the game of
dice rests on the laws of chance, and Einstein believed that the
latter concept finds its scientific meaning solely in the epistemo-
logical limitations of the finite knowing niind in its relation to
the omnicomplete object of scientific knowledge and, hence, is
misapplied when referred ontologically to that object itself. The
object being per se all complete and in this sense omniscient,
after the manner of God, the concept of chance or of probability
is inappropriate for any scientific description of it.
This book is important because it contains Heisenberg's
answer to this criticism of his principle of indeterminacy
and of quantum theory by Einstein and by others. In under-
standing this answer two things must be kept in mind: ( 1 ) The
aforementioned relation between the data of experimental
physics and the concepts of its theory. (2) The difference be-
tween the role of the concept of. probability in (a) Newton's
mechanics and Einstein's theory of relativity and in (b) quan-
tum mechanics. Upon(
1 ),
Einstein and Heisenberg, and rela-
tivistic mechanics and quantum mechanics, are in agreement.
It is only with respect to (2) that they differ. Yet the reason for
Heisenberg's and the quantum physicist's difference from Ein-
stein on (2) depends in considerable part on ( 1 ) which Einstein
admits.
(1) affirms that the experimental data of physics do not
imply its theoretical concepts. From this it follows that the object
of scientific knowledge is never known directly by observation or
experimentation, but is only known by speculatively proposed
theoretic construction or axiomatic postulation, tested only
indirectly and experimentally via its deduced consequences. To find the object of scientific knowledge we must go, therefore,
to its theoretical assumptions.
When we do this for (a) Newton's or Einstein's mechanics
and for (b) quantum mechanics, we discover that the concept
of probability or chance enters into the definition of the state of
a physical system, and, in this sense, into its subject matter, in
quantum mechanics, but does not do so in Newton's mechanics
or Einstein's theory of relativity. This undoubtedly is what
Heisenberg means when he writes in this book that quantum
theory has brought the concept of potentiality back into physical
science. It is also, without question, what Einstein has in mind
when he objects to quantum theory.
Put more concretely, this difference between quantum me-
chanics and previous physical theories may be expressed as
follows: In Newton's and Einstein's theory, the state of any
isolated mechanical system at a given moment of time is given
precisely when only numbers specifying the position and mo-
mentum of each mass in the system are empirically determined
at that moment of time; no numbers referring to a probability
are present. In quantum mechanics the interpretation of an
observation of a system is a rather complicated procedure. The
observation may consist in a single reading, the accuracy of
which has to be discussed, or it may comprise a complicated set
of data, such as the photograph of the water droplets in a cloud
chamber; in any case, the result can be stated only in terms of a
probability distribution concerning, for instance, the position or
momentum of the particles of the system. The theory then pre-
dicts the probability distribution for a future time. The theory is
not experimentally verified when that future state arrives if
merely the momentum or position numbers in a particular ob-
servation lie within the predicted range. The same experiment with the same initial conditions must be repeated many times,
and the values of position or momentum, which may be different
in each observation, must similarly be found to be distributed ac-
cording to the predicted probability distribution. In short, the
crucial difference between quantum mechanics and Einstein's or
Newton's mechanics centers in the definition of a mechanical
system at any moment of time, and this difference is that quan-
tum mechanics introduces the concept of probability into its
definition of state and the mechanics of Newton and Einstein
does not.
This does not mean that probability had no place in Newton's
or Einstein's mechanics. Its place was, however, solely in the
theory of errors by means of which the accuracy of the Yes or
No verification or nonconfirmation of the prediction of the
theory was determined. Hence, the concept of probability and
chance was restricted to the epistemological relation of the
scientist in the verification of what he knows; it did not enter
into the theoretical statement of what he knows. Thus, Einstein's
dictum that "God does not play dice" was satisfied in his two
theories of relativity and in Newton's mechanics.
Is there any way of deciding between Einstein's contention
and that of Heisenberg and other quantum theorists? Many
answers have been given to this question. Some physicists and
philosophers, emphasizing operational definitions, have argued
that, since all physical theories, even classical ones, entail human
error and uncertainties, there is nothing to be decided between
Einstein and the quantum theorists. This, however, is (a) to
overlook the presence of axiomatically constructed, constitutive
theoretic definitions as well as theory-of-errors, operational
definitions in scientific method and (b) to suppose that the
concept of probability and the even more complex uncertainty relation enter into quantum mechanics only in the operational-
definitional sense. Heisenberg shows that the latter supposition
.isjalse.
Other scientists and philosophers, going to the opposite ex-
treme, have argued that, merely because there is uncertainty in
predicting certain phenomena, this constitutes no argument
whatever for the thesis that these phenomena are not completely
determined. This argument combines the statical problem of
defining the state of a mechanical system at a given time with
the dynamical or causal problem of predicting changes in the
state of the system through time. But the concept of probability
in quantum theory enters only into its statics, i.e., its theoretical
definition of state. The reader will find it wise, therefore, to keep
distinct these two components, i.e., the statical theoretical
definition-of-state component and the dynamic, or causal, theo-
retical change-of-state-through-time component. With respect to
the former, the concept of probability and the attendant un-
certainty enter theoretically and in principle; they do not refer
merely to the operational and epistemological uncertainties and
errors, arising from the finiteness of, and inaccuracies in, human
behavior, that are common to any scientific theory and any
experimentation whatsoever.
But, why, it may be asked, should the concept of probability
be introduced into the theoretic definition of the state of a me-
chanical system at any statical moment t
1 in principle? In mak-
ing such a theoretical construct by axiomatic postulation, do not
Heisenberg and quantum theoreticians generally beg the ques-
tion at issue between themselves and Einstein? This book makes
it clear that the answer to these questions is as follows: The
reason for the procedure of quantum mechanics is thesis (1)
above, which Einstein himself also accepts. Thesis ( 1 ) is that we know the object of scientific knowledge
only by the speculative means of axiomatic theoretic construc-
tion or postulation; Newton's suggestion that the physicist can
deduce our theoretical concepts from the experimental data
being false. It follows that there is no a priori or empirical mean-
ing for affirming that the object of scientific knowledge, or, more
specifically, the state of a mechanical system at a given time t
1
,
must be defined in a particular way. The sole criterion is, which
set of theoretic assumptions concerning the subject matter of
mechanics when pursued to their deduced experimental conse-
quences is confirmed by the experimental data?
Now, it happens that when we theoretically and in principle
define the state of a mechanical system for subatomic phe-
nomena in terms solely of numbers referring to position and
momentum, as Einstein would have us do, and deduce the
consequences for radiation from black bodies, this theoretical
assumption concerning the state of a mechanical system and the
subject matter of atomic physics is shown to be false by experi-
mental evidence. The experimental facts simply are not what the
theory calls for. When, however, the traditional theory is modi-
fied with the introduction of Planck's constant and the addition
in principle of the second set of numbers referring to the proba-
bility that the attached position-momentum numbers will be
found, from which the uncertainty principle follows, the experi-
mental data confirm the new theoretical concepts and principles.
In short, the situation in quantum mechanics with respect to
experiments on black-body radiation is identical with that faced
by Einstein with respect to the Michelson-Morley experiment. In
both cases, only by introducing the new theoretical assumption
in principle is physical theory brought into accord with the fex-
perimental facts. Thus, to assert that, notwithstanding quantum mechanics, the positions and momenta of subatomic masses are
"really" sharply located in space and time as designated by one
pair of numbers only and, hence, completely deterministic caus-
ally, as Einstein and the aforementioned philosophers of science
would have one do, is to affirm a theory concerning the subject
matter of physical knowledge which experiments on black-body
radiation have shown to be false in the sense that a deductive
experimental consequence of this theory is not confirmed.
It does not follow, of course, that some new theory compatible
with the foregoing experimental facts might not be discovered in
which the concept of probability does not enter in principle into
its definition of state. Professor Norbert Wiener, for example,
believes that he has clues to the direction such a theory might
take. It would, however, have to reject a definition of state in
terms of the four space-time dimensions of Einstein's theory and
would, therefore, be incompatible with Einstein's thesis on other
grounds. Certainly, one cannot rule out such a possibility.
Nevertheless, until such an alternative theory is presented, any-
one, who does not claim to possess some a priori or private
source of information concerning what the object of scientific
knowledge must be, has no alternative but to accept the defini-
tion of state of quantum theory and to affirm with the author of
this book that it restores the concept of potentiality to the object
of modern scientific knowledge. Experiments on black-body
radiation require one to conclude that God plays dice.
What of the status of causality and determinism in quantum
mechanics? Probably the interest of the layman and the human-
ist in this book depends most on its answer to this question.
If this answer is to be understood, the reader must pay par-
ticular attention to Heisenberg's description of (a) the afore-
mentioned definition of state by recourse to the concept of probability and (b) the Schrodinger time-equation. The reader
must also make sure, and this is the most difficult task of all, that
the meaning of the words "causality" and "determinism" in his
mind when he asks the above question is identical with the
meaning these words have in Heisenberg's mind when he speci-
fies the answer. Otherwise, Heisenberg will be answering a
different question from the one the reader is asking and a com-
plete misunderstanding upon the reader's part will occur.
The situation is further complicated by the fact that modern
physics permits the concept of causality to have two different,
scientifically precise meanings, the one stronger than the other,
and there is no agreement among physicists about which one of
these two meanings the word "causality" is to be used to desig-
nate. Hence, some physicists and philosophers of science use the
word to designate the stronger of the two meanings. There is
evidence, at times at least, that this is Professor Heisenberg*s
usage in this book. Other physicists and philosophers, including
the writer of this Introduction, use the word "causality" to
designate the weaker of the two meanings and the word "de-
terminism" to designate the stronger meaning. When the former
usage is followed, the words "causality" and "determinism"
become synonymous. When the second usage is followed, every
deterministic system is a causal system, but not every causal
system is deterministic.
Great confusion has entered into previous discussion of this
topic because frequently neither the person who asks the ques-
tion nor the physicist who has answered it has been careful to
specify in either question or answer whether he is using the word
"causality" in its weaker or in its stronger modern scientific
meaning. If one asks "Does causality hold in quantum me-
chanics?" not specifying whether one is asking about causality in its stronger or in its weaker sense, one then gets apparently
contradictory answers from equally competent physicists. One
physicist, taking the word "causality" in its stronger sense, quite
correctly answers "No." The other physicist, taking "causality"
in its weaker sense, equally correctly answers "Yes." Naturally,
the impression has arisen that quantum mechanics is not specific
about what the answer is. Nevertheless, this impression is er-
roneous. The answer of quantum mechanics becomes unequiv-
ocal the moment one makes the question and the answer
unambiguous by specifying which meaning of "causality" one is
talking about.
It is important, therefore, to become clear about different
possible meanings of the word "causality.'
5 Let us begin with the
layman's common-sense usage of the word "cause33 and then
move to the more exact meanings in modern physics, considering
the meaning in Aristotle's physics on the way.
One may say "The stone hit the window and caused the glass
to break/3 In this use of "causality" it is thought of as a relation
between objects, i.e., between the stone and the windowpane.
The scientist expresses the same thing in a different way. He
describes the foregoing set of events in terms of the state of the
stone and the windowpane at the earlier time t
1 when the stone
and the windowpane were separated and the state of this same
system of two objects at the later time t
2 when the stone and the
windowpane collided. Consequently, whereas the layman tends
to think of causality as a relation between objects, the scientist
thinks of it as a relation between different states of the same
object or the same system of objects at different times.
This is why, in order to determine what quantum mechanics
says about causality, one must pay attention to two things: ( 1 )
The state-function which defines the state of any physical system at any specific time t. (2) The Schrodinger time-equation which
relates the state of the physical system at the earlier time t
1
to its
different state at any specifiable later time t
2
. What Heisenberg
says about (
1 ) and (2) must, therefore, be read with meticulous
care.
It will help to understand what quantum mechanics says
about the relation between the states of a given physical object,
or system of physical objects, at different times if we consider the
possible properties that this relation might have. The weakest
possible case would be that of mere temporal succession with no
necessary connection whatever and with not even a probability,
however small, that the specifiable initial state will be followed
in time by a specifiable future state. Hume gives us reasons for
believing that the relation between the sensed states of im-
mediately sensed natural phenomena is of this character. Cer-
tainly, as he pointed out, one does not sense any relation of
necessary connection. Nor does one directly sense probability. All
that sensation gives us with respect to the successive states of any
phenomenon is the mere relation of temporal succession.
This point is of great importance. It means that one can
arrive at a causal theory in any science or in common-sense
knowledge, or even at a probability theory, of the relation be-
tween the successive states of any object or system, only by
speculative means and axiomatically constructed, deductively
formulated scientific and philosophical theory which is tested
not directly against the sensed and experimental data but only
indirectly by way of its deductive consequences.
A second possibility with respect to the character of the rela-
tion between the states of any physical system at different times
is that the relation is a necessary one, but that one can know
what this necessary connection is only by knowing the future state. The latter knowledge of the future state may be obtained
either by waiting until it arrives or by having seen the future or
final state of similar systems in the past. When such is the case,
causality is teleological. Changes of the system with time are
determined by the final state or goal of the system. The physical
system which is an acorn in the earlier state t
1 and an oak tree
2
in the later state t
is an example. The connection between these
two states seems to be a necessary one. Acorns never change into
maple trees or into elephants. They change only into oaks. Yet,
given the properties of this physical system in the acorn state of
1
the earlier time t
,
no scientist has as yet been able to deduce
the properties of the oak tree which the system will have at the
2
later time t
. Aristotelian physics affirmed that all causal rela-
tions are teleological.
Another possibility is that the relation between the states of
any object, or any system of objects, at different times is a
relation of necessary connection such that, given knowledge of
the initial state of the system, assuming isolation, its future state
can be deduced. Stated in more technical mathematical lan-
guage, this means that there exists an indirectly verified, axio-
matically constructed theory whose postulates (1) specify a
state-function, the independent variables of which completely
define the state of the system at any specific instant of time, and
(2) provide a time-equation relating the numerical empirical
values of the independent variables of this function at any earlier
1
time t
to their numerical empirical values at any specific later
time t
2 in such a way that by introducing the operationally de-
1
termined t
set of numbers into the time-equation the future t
2
numbers can be deduced by merely solving the equation. When
this is the case, the temporal relation between states is said to
exemplify mechanical causation. It is to be noted that this definition of mechanical causality
leaves open the question of what independent variables are re-
quired to define the state of the system at any given time. Hence,
at least two possibilities arise: (a) the concept of probability
may be used to define the state of the system or (b) it may not
be so used. When (b) is the case no independent variables re-
ferring to probabilities appear in the state-function and the
stronger type of mechanical causality is present. When (a) is
the case independent variables referring to probabilities, as well
as to other properties such as position and momentum, appear
in the state-function and only the weaker type of mechanical
causation occurs. If the reader keeps these two meanings of me-
chanical causation in mind and makes sure which meaning
Heisenberg is referring to in any particular sentence of this book,
he should be able to get its answer to the question concerning
the status of causality in modern physics.
What of determinism? Again, there is no agreed-upon con-
vention among physicists and philosophers of science about how
this word is to be used. It is in accord with the common-sense
usage to identify it with the strongest possible causality. Let us,
then, use the word "determinism" to denote only the stronger
type of mechanical causation. Then I believe the careful reader
of this book will get the following answer to his question: In
Newtonian, Einsteinian and quantum mechanics, mechanical,
rather than teleological, causality holds. This is why quantum
physics is called quantum mechanics, rather than quantum
teleologies. But, whereas causality in Newton's and Einstein's
physics is of the stronger type and, hence, both mechanical and
deterministic, in quantum mechanics it is of the weaker causal
type and, hence, mechanical but not deterministic. From the
latter fact it follows that if anywhere in this book Heisenberg uses the words "mechanical causality" in their stronger, de-
terministic meaning and the question be asked "Does me-
chanical causation in this stronger meaning hold in quantum
mechanics?" then the answer has to be "No,"
The situation is even more complicated, as the reader will
find, than even these introductory distinctions between the dif-
ferent types of causation indicate. It is to be hoped, however,
that this focusing of attention upon these different meanings will
enable the reader to find his way through this exceptionally im-
portant book more easily than would otherwise be the case.
These distinctions should suffice, also, to enable one to grasp
the tremendous philosophical significance of the introduction of
the weaker type of mechanical causation into modern physics,
which has occurred in quantum mechanics. Its significance con-
sists in reconciling the concept of objective, and in this sense on-
tological, potentiality of Aristotelian physics with the concept of
mechanical causation of modern physics.
It would be an error, therefore, if the reader, from Heisen-
berg's emphasis upon the presence in quantum mechanics
of something analogous to Aristotle's concept of potentiality,
concluded that contemporary physics has taken us back to
Aristotle's physics and ontology. It would be an equal error con-
versely to conclude, because mechanical causation in its weaker
meaning still holds in quantum mechanics, that all is the same
now in modern physics with respect to its causality and ontology
as was the case before quantum mechanics came into being.
What has occurred is that in quantum theory contemporary
man has moved on beyond the classical medieval and the
modern world to a new physics and philosophy which combines
consistently some of the basic causal and ontological assumptions
of each. Here, let it be recalled, we use the word "ontological" to denote any experimentally verified concept of scientific theory
which refers to the object of scientific knowledge rather than
merely to the epistemological relation of the scientist as knower
to the object which he knows. Such an experimentally verified
philosophical synthesis of ontological potentiality with ontolog-
ical mechanical causality, in the weaker meaning of the latter
concept, occurred when physicists found it impossible to account
theoretically for the Compton effect and the results of experiment
on black-body radiation unless they extended the concept of
probability from its Newtonian and Einsteinian merely epis-
temological, theory-of-errors role in specifying when their theory
is or is not experimentally confirmed to the ontological role,
specified in principle in the theory's postulates, of characterizing
the object of scientific knowledge itself.
Need one wonder that Heisenberg went through the sub-
jective emotional experiences described in this book before he
became reconciled to the necessity, imposed by both experi-
mental and mathematical considerations, of modifying the phil-
osophical and scientific beliefs of both medieval and modern
man in so deep-going a manner. Those interested in a firsthand
description of the human spirit in one of its most creative
moments will want to read this book because of this factor
alone. The courage which it took to make this step away from
the unqualified determinism of classical modern physics may
be appreciated if one recalls that even such a daring, creative
spirit as Einstein balked. He could not allow God to play dice;
there could not be potentiality in the object of scientific knowl-
edge, as the weaker form of mechanical causality in quantum
mechanics allows.
Before one concludes, however, that God has become a com-
plete gambler and that potentiality is in all objects, certain limi-tations which quantum mechanics places on the application of
its weaker form of mechanical causation must be noted. To
appreciate these qualifications the reader must note what this
book says about (1) the Compton effect, (2) Planck's constant
h, and (3) the uncertainty principle which is defined in terms
of Planck's constant.
This constant h is a number referring to the quantum of
action of any object or system of objects. This quantum, which
extends atomicity from matter and electricity to light and even
to energy itself, is very small. When the quantum numbers of the
system being observed are small, as is the case with subatomic
phenomena, then the uncertainty specified by the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle of the positions and momenta of the masses
of the system becomes significant. Then, also, the probability
numbers associated with the position-momentum numbers in the
state-function become significant. When, however, the quantum
numbers of the system are large, then the quantitative amount
of uncertainty specified by the Heisenberg principle becomes in-
significant and the probability numbers in the state-function can
be neglected. Such is the case with gross common-sense objects.
At this point quantum mechanics with its basically weaker type
of causality gives rise, as a special case of itself, to Newtonian
and Einsteinian mechanics with their stronger type of causality
and determinism. Consequently, for human beings considered
merely as gross common-sense objects the stronger type of caus-
ality holds and, hence, determinism reigns also.
Nevertheless, subatomic phenomena are scientifically signifi-
cant in man. To this extent, at least, the causality governing him
is of the weaker type, and he embodies both mechanical fate and
potentiality. There are scientific reasons for believing that this
occurs even in heredity. Any reader who wants to pursue this topic beyond the pages of this book should turn to What Is
*
Life?
by Professor Erwin Schrodinger, the physicist after
whom the time-equation in quantum mechanics is named. Un-
doubtedly, potentiality and the weaker form of causality hold
also for countless other characteristics of human beings, particu-
larly for those cortical neural phenomena in man that are the
epistemic correlates of directly introspected human ideas and
purposes.
If the latter possibility is the case, the solution of a baffling
scientific, philosophical and even moral problem may be at
hand. This problem is: How is the mechanical causation, even
in its weaker form, of quantum mechanics to be reconciled with
the tdeological causation patently present in the moral, political
and legal purposes of man and in the teleological causal de-
termination of his bodily behavior, in part at least, by these pur-
poses? In short, how is the philosophy of physics expounded in
this book by Heisenberg to be reconciled with moral, political
and legal science and philosophy?
It may help the reader to appreciate why this book must be
mastered before these larger questions can be correctly under-
stood or effectively answered if very brief reference is made here
to some articles which relate its theory of physical causation to
the wider relation between mechanism and teleology in the
humanities and the social sciences. The relevant articles are (a)
by Professors Rosenblueth, Wiener and Bigdow in the journal
of The Philosophy of Science for January, 1943
; (b) by Doctors
McCulloch and Pitts in The Bulletin of Mathematical Bio-
physics, Volume 5, 1943, and Volume 9, 1947; and (c) Chapter
XIX of Ideological Differences and World Order, edited by the
writer of this Introduction and published by the Yale University Press in 1949. If read after this book, (a) will show how teleo-
logical causality arises as a special case of the merchanical
causality described by Heisenberg here. Similarly, (b) will pro-
vide a physical theory of the neurological correlates of intro-
spected ideas, expressed in terms of the teleologically mechanical
causality of (a), thereby giving an explanation of how ideas
can have a causally significant effect on the behavior of men.
Likewise, (c) will show how the ideas and purposes of moral,
political and legal man relate, by way of (b) and (a), to the
theory of physical potentiality and mechanical causality so
thoroughly described by Heisenberg in this book.
It remains to call attention to what Professor Heisenberg says
about Bohr's principle of complementarity. This principle plays
a great role in the interpretation of quantum theory by "the
Copenhagen School" to which Bohr and Heisenberg belong.
Some students of quantum mechanics, such as Margenau in his
book The Nature of Physical Reality,* are inclined to the con-
clusion that quantum mechanics requires merely its definition of
state, its Schrodinger time-equation and those other of its
mathematical postulates which suffice to ensure, as noted above,
that Einsteinian and Newtonian mechanics corne out of quan-
tum mechanics as one of its special cases. According to the
latter thesis, the principle of complementarity arises from the
failure to keep the stronger and weaker form of mechanical
causality continuously in mind, with the resultant attribution of
the stronger form to those portions of quantum mechanics where
only the weaker form is involved. When this happens, the
principle of complementarity has to be introduced to avoid contradiction. If, however, one avoids the foregoing practice,
the principle of complementarity becomes, if not unnecessary,
at least of a form such that one avoids the danger, noted by
Margenau
* and appreciated by Bohr, of giving pseudo solu-
tions to physical and philosophical problems by playing fast and
loose with the law of contradiction, in the name of the principle
of complementarity.
By its use the qualifications that had to be put on both the
particle-picture common-sense language of atomic physics and
its common-sense wave-picture language were brought to-
gether. But once having formulated the result with axiomatically
constructed mathematical exactitude, any further use of it is
merely a superficial convenience when, leaving aside the exact
and essential mathematical assumptions of quantum mechanics,
one indulges in the common-sense language and images of
waves and particles.
It has been necessary to go into the different interpretations
of the principle of complementarity in order to enable the
reader to pass an informed judgment concerning what Heisen-
berg says in this book about the common-sense and Cartesian
concepts of material and mental substances. This is the case
because his conclusion concerning Descartes results from his
generalization of the principle of complementarity beyond phys-
ics, first, to the relation between common-sense biological con-
cepts and mathematical physical concepts and, second, to the
body-mind problem. The result of this generalization is that
the Cartesian theory of mental substances comes off very much
better in this book, as does the concept of substance generally,
than is the case in any other book on the philosophy of con-
temporary physics which this writer knows. Whitehead, for example, concluded that contemporary
science and philosophy find no place for, and have no need of,
the concept of substance. Neutral monists such as Lord Russell
and logical positivists such as Professor Carnap agree.
Generally speaking, Heisenberg argues that there is no
compelling reason to throw away any of the common-sense
concepts of either biology or mathematical physics, after one
knows the refined concepts that lead to the complete clarifica-
tion of the problems in atomic physics. Because the latter clari-
fication is complete, it is relevant only to a very limited range
of problems within science and cannot enable us to avoid using
many concepts at other places that would not stand critical
analysis of the type carried out in quantum theory. Since the
ideal of complete clarification cannot be achieved and it is
important that we should not be deceived about this point
one may indulge in the usage of common-sense concepts if it is
done with sufficient care and caution. In this respect, certainly,
complementarity is a very useful scientific concept.
In any event, two things seem clear and make what Heisen-
berg says on these matters exceedingly important. First, the
principle of complementarity and the present validity of the
Cartesian and common-sense concepts of body and mind stand
and fall together. Second, it may be that both these notions are
merely convenient stepladders which should now be, or must
eventually be, thrown away. Even so, in the case of the theory of
mind at least, the stepladder will have to remain until by its use
we find the more linguistically exact and empirically satis-
factory theory that will permit us to throw the Cartesian lan-
guage away. To be sure, piecemeal theories of mind which do
not appeal to the notion of substance now exist, but none of
their authors, unless it be Whitehead, has shown how the Iangauge of this piecemeal theory can be brought into com-
mensurate and compatible relationship with the scientific
language of the other facts of human knowledge. It is likely,
therefore, that anyone, whether he be a professional physicist or
philosopher or the lay reader, who may think he knows better
than Heisenberg on these important matters, runs the grave risk
of supposing he has a scientific theory of mind in its relation to
body, when in fact this is not the case.
Up to this point we have directed attention, with but two ex-
ceptions, to what the philosophy of contemporary physics has to
say about the object of scientific knowledge qua object, inde-
pendent of its relation to the scientist as knower. In short, we
have been concerned with its ontology. This philosophy also has
its epistemological component. This component falls into three
parts: (1) The relation between (a) the directly observed data
given to the physicist as inductive knower in his observations or
his experiments and (b) the speculatively proposed, indirectly
verified, axiomatically constructed postulates of his theory. The
latter term (b) defines the objects of scientific knowledge qua
object and, hence, gives the ontology. The relation between (a)
and (b) defines one factor in the epistemology. (2) The role of
the concept of probability in the theory of errors, by means of
which the physicist defines the criterion for judging how far his
experimental findings can depart, due to errors of human ex-
perimentation, from the deduced consequences of the postulates
of the theory and still be regarded as confirming the theory. (3 )
The effect of the experiment being performed upon the object
being known. What Heisenberg says about the first and second
of these three epistemological factors in contemporary physics
has already been emphasized in this Introduction. It remains to
direct the reader's attention to what he says about item (3 ). In modern physical theory, previous to quantum mechanics,
(3) played no role whatever. Hence, the epistemology of
modern physics was then completely specified by ( 1 ) and ( 2 )
alone. In quantum mechanics, however, (3) (as well as (1)
and (2)) becomes very important. The very act of observing
alters the object being observed when its quantum numbers are
small.
From this fact Heisenberg draws a very important conclusion
concerning the relation between the object, the observing
physicist, and the rest of the universe. This conclusion can be
appreciated if attention is directed to the following key points.
It may be recalled that in some of the definitions of mechanical
causality given earlier in this Introduction, the qualifying words
"for an isolated system" were added; elsewhere it was implicit.
This qualifying condition can be satisfied in principle in New-
tonian and Einsteinian mechanics, and also in practice by mak-
ing more and more careful observations and refinements in
one's experimental instruments. The introduction of the concept
of probability into the definition of state of the object of scien-
tific knowledge in quantum mechanics rules out, however, in
principle, and not merely in practice due to the imperfections of
human observation and instruments, the satisfying of the condi-
tion that the object of the physicist's knowledge is an isolated
system. Heisenberg shows also that the including of the experi-
mental apparatus and even of the eye of the observing scientist
in the physical system which is the object of the knower's knowl-
edge does not help, since, if quantum mechanics be correct, the
states of all objects have to be defined in principle by recourse to
the concept of probability. Consequently, only if the whole
universe is included in the object of scientific knowledge can
the qualifying condition "for an isolated system" be satisfied for even the weaker form of mechanical causation. Clearly, the
philosophy of contemporary physics is shown by this book to be
as novel in its epistemology as it is in its ontology. Indeed, it is
from the originality of its ontology the consistent unification
of potentiality and mechanical causality in its weaker form
that the novelty of its epistemology arises.
Unquestionably, one other thing is clear. An analysis of the
specific experimentally verified theories of modern physics with
respect to what they say about the object of human knowledge
and its relation to the human knower exhibits a very rich and
complex ontological and epistemological philosophy which is
an essential part of the scientific theory and method itself.
Hence, physics is neither epistemologically nor ontologically
neutral. Deny any one of the epistemological assumptions of the
physicist's theory and there is no scientific method for testing
whether what the theory says about the physical object is true,
in the sense of being empirically confirmed. Deny any one of the
ontological assumptions and there is not enough content in the
axiomatically constructed mathematical postulates of the physi-
cist's theory to permit the deduction of the experimental facts
which it is introduced to predict, co-ordinate consistently and
explain. Hence, to the extent that experimental physicists assure
us that their theory of contemporary physics is indirectly and
experimentally verified, they ipso facto assure us that its rich
and complex ontological and epistemological philosophy is
verified also.
When such empirically verified philosophy of the true in the
natural sciences is identified with the criterion of the good and
the just in the humanities and the social sciences, one has
natural-law ethics and jurisprudence. In other words, one has a
scientifically meaningful cognitive criterion and method for judging both the verbal, personal and social norms of the posi-
tive law and the living ethos embodied in the customs, habits
and traditional cultural institutions of the de facto peoples and
cultures of the world. It is the coming together of this new
philosophy of physics with the respective philosophies of culture
of mankind that is the major event in today's and tomorrow's
world. At this point, the philosophy of physics in this book and
its important reference to the social consequences of physics
come together.
The chapters of this book have been read as Gifford Lectures
at the University of St. Andrews during the winter term 1955
1956. According to the will of their founder the Gifford Lectures
should "freely discuss all questions about man's conceptions of
God or the Infinite, their origin, nature, and truth, whether he
can have any such conceptions, whether God is under any or
what limitations and so on." The lectures of Heisenberg do not
attempt to reach these most general and most difficult problems.
But they try to go far beyond the limited scope of a special
science into the wide field of those general human problems that
have been raised by the enormous recent development and the
far-reaching practical applications of natural science.